---
title: Daily driving a Macbook Air M4
subtitle: What "just works" and what does not
date: "2025-06-12T14:26-07:00"
image: "/assets/images/2025-06-12.jpg"
imageAttrib: "Captured by Piyush Puranik"
---

Earlier this year, I made a very bold move... I switched from using a Linux based laptop to a Macbook Air. The laptop I was using prior to the Mac was an old Lenovo Yoga with a Ryzen 7 5000 series chip. I don't remember the model number, but it was quite a capable laptop. Especially after I wiped Windows off of it and installed Aurora (Fedora). As time went on though, the typical "old laptop" woes began cropping up: poor battery life, slow build times and run times for code, difficulty with multi-tasking... Although this probably wasn't as egregious as what I've seen on Windows computers. So, I started looking for a new laptop. What I found is that in 2025, the market for laptops is quite bad. I wanted something that has good battery life, a decent screen, good keyboard, and that's reasonably powerful for coding and multi-tasking. Since the very first thing I do when I buy a laptop is nuke Windows and install Linux, it also had to have good Linux support. 

What I found was that for a laptop that did ALL of that, I'd end up paying nearly $2000... There were a few Snapdragon based Windows laptops that had great battery life but there was always some compromise or the other: the track pad wasn't great, the keyboard was mushy, it was too expensive (more than $1500). Most importantly, Linux support on Snapdragon based laptops is still quite young and I would pretty much be forced to use Windows which I find rather tedious and annoying.

Previously, I've never considered Macbooks as reasonable purchases. They're typically expensive for what you get... or so I thought. While I was on a hunt for a new laptop, my brother-in-law was visiting. He is totally an Apple fanboy and uses a Macbook daily for coding and development. What I noticed was that the Macbook Air M4 that he was using, literally never slowed down, and was blazingly fast for everything he was doing on it. He had 2 browsers with about 20 tabs in each, VS Code, a messaging app, Spotify, Discord, and some other background applications open at the same time and it was still blazingly fast. The real shocker for me was that he paid $899 for it (with the student discount). I thought I'd found a perfect solution!

I ended up buying the exact same laptop except with 24GB of RAM and 500GB Of storage. I also took advantage of Apple's education discount being in academia. After about 3 months of using a Mac, here are my thoughts.

# What "just works"

Apple fanboys love to claim that everything in the Apple ecosystem "just works". Although I find that to be objectively false (more on that in a bit), I did find that a lot of things on a Macbook are rather easy to use.

## Trackpad

For starters, the trackpad is the best there is. I have yet to find any laptop which implements gestures the way Apple does. The "click" is also not actually a click. It's just some motor or vibration mechanism that provides haptic feedback based on how much pressure is being applied to it. It totally *feels* like a click, which I think is insane. 

Using swipes to move between desktops, quickly looking through running applications and switching between application windows is a breeze. Although Gnome is very good at multiple desktops and application management, I felt that the way Mac implements default gestures is far better than Gnome. In particular, I like that Mac OS allows you to see all windows of the active application instead of seeing every open application if you want to. The clear distinction between maximize and fullscreen (Option + Click), and creating a separate desktop for each fullscreen application feels a lot more intuitive. Plus, despite Gnome's best efforts, you're still stuck with whatever trackpad your laptop came with which is probably not as good as the one on a Mac.

## Managing Apps

Now installing applications on a Mac is not as quick as it is on most Linux distros, but compared to Windows, it's far easier. Simply download the *.dmg* file for your application, run it, and drag and drop the application to the application directory. It's as simple as dragging and dropping a file to a folder. Removing applications is similar too: Open the Applications folder, and drag the application to the trash can.

I think the most important thing here is that if an application is designed for Apple Silicon, it will always work very well. This is contrary to what I've seen with Linux and Windows where getting something to work with different distros or hardware configurations can be tedious; particularly for more specialized software.

Moreover, I got Homebrew on my Mac which is practically a necessity for any kind of development or coding work. It works almost exactly like a Linux package manager which satiated the void I had from switching away from Linux. The Mac environment is very Unix like, and POSIX compliant, which makes it very easy to get into for Linux users.

## Sleep and Resume

So far, I have found literally no laptop that can seamlessly and quickly resume from sleep when the lid is opened. Windows laptops are relatively quick to resume nowadays, but they drain way too much battery when on sleep. I have personally not tested this, but I have heard multiple accounts of Windows laptops completely draining when sleeping.

My Macbook is awake before I've even finished opening the lid. I've often just left it in my backpack over the weekend and the battery level did not change when I opened it up again on Monday.

## Security and Updates

This is practically a non-issue for Linux laptops but I was presently surprised to see no annoying update popups on Mac either. It quietly does its updates and stays out of the way. 