---
title: Welcome to Average Nerd Post
subtitle: Facts, opinions and musings of a nerd
date: "2025-05-26T17:26-07:00"
image: "/assets/images/2025-05-26T17-26.png"
imageAttrib: "AI Generated using Gemini"
---


# What is Average Nerd Post?

Some of you may already know me from my YouTube channel called [Average Nerd Talks](https://www.youtube.com/@AverageNerdTalks). This is kind of an extension of that channel, but the focus is broader. 

## About Average Nerd Talks

On Average Nerd Talks I primarily talk about open source computing and various aspects of Linux. The agenda of that channel is simply to raise awareness about open source software that is available to the general public. I think a lot of people are not aware that whatever programs or operating systems they're using and have generally heard of are not the only ones out there. Open source software and operating systems often fly under the radar due to a lack of marketing. Particularly for operating systems, this leads to poor support from other software developers because they don't want to spend the resources to support a platform that has a small user base. This in turn leads to poor growth... It essentially turns into a chicken and egg problem.

## About Average Nerd Post

I created Average Nerd Post (this website) to talk about similar aspects of tech (open source and free software). However, I also wanted to have a platform to showcase some of my opinions about the world (tech and otherwise). Just to clarify: this is not intended to be a news source.

If you read the [about](/about/) page, you'll know that I am obsessed with data and (over) analyzing it. This of course leads to analysis paralysis that I have to deal with on a day to day basis; but that's a topic for another day. With online media outlets obsessed with propagating misery, I thought I'd leverage this little platform to bring some perspective into your lives. The only way I know how to do that is by disseminating data to find evidence and presenting you with it. Of course there are various different ways to present data and plenty of different ways to interpret it to suit whatever world view you may hold. So, take whatever I post here with a grain of salt and do your own research!

# Always Free

This website will always be free to the public with no paywalls and no ads. I'm not an influencer and I don't shill for sponsorships. Neither my YouTube channel, nor this website is for profit. I will keep this website alive as long as I am financially able to do so. If you do happen to see ads here, please inform me asap so I can take action on that. 

